{\rtf1\ansi\ansicpg1252\cocoartf1347\cocoasubrtf570
{\fonttbl\f0\fswiss\fcharset0 Helvetica-Light;\f1\fswiss\fcharset0 Helvetica;}
{\colortbl;\red255\green255\blue255;\red70\green71\blue73;\red80\green22\blue124;\red133\green68\blue40;
\red191\green191\blue191;}
\margl1440\margr1440\vieww12360\viewh12820\viewkind0
\deftab720
\pard\pardeftab720\sa166

\f0\fs24 \cf2 \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
Visual stimuli located outside of the classical receptive field of a neuron in visual cortex while unable to elicit spiking may modulate the neuron\'92s response to stimuli located in its receptive field. Surround suppression, a basic operation in visual processing, is a classical example of this type of modulation\cf3 \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
 \cf2 \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
and can be easily observed when monitoring the firing of a neuron to a stimulus of increasing size centered on its receptive field (i.e. the size tuning of the neuron): The neuron\'92s initial increase in firing is followed by a decrease as the stimulus becomes progressively larger. This form of suppression has been suggested to contribute to a number of perceptual effects like pop-out, curvature detection and orientation discrimination. Importantly surround suppression is not only observed in the cortex but is already present at earlier stages along the visual hierarchy namely in the retina and the thalamus. Thus while it is likely that at least part of suppressive surround observed in the cortex is relayed from earlier stages of visual processing, some experimental observations and theoretical models suggest that the cortex is itself capable of contributing to surround suppression. Below we reveal the identity and describe the mechanism of a cortical circuit that directly contributes to surround suppression in the superficial layers of primary visual cortex.\
\pard\pardeftab720\sl360

\f1\b\fs34 \cf4 \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
\
\pard\pardeftab720\sa166

\f0\b0\fs24 \cf2 \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
Different size tuning of distinct neurons\
We determined the tuning to the size of a visual stimulus for neurons in the superficial layers of the primary visual cortex (V1; depth ~100\'96350 \'b5m, corresponding approximately to layer 2/3) of mice. Experiments were performed in awake, running animals, as size tuning was affected by anesthesia ({\field{\*\fldinst{HYPERLINK "http://europepmc.org/articles/PMC3621107#SD2"}}{\fldrslt \cf3 \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
Suppl. Fig. 1}}). Mice were head fixed but otherwise unrestrained and free to run on a passive circular treadmill. For behavioral consistency all data presented here were recorded during running events (see methods).Visual stimuli were composed of circular patches of drifting gratings at maximal contrast presented at 6\'967 different sizes (from 8 \'96 96 degrees in diameter, {\field{\*\fldinst{HYPERLINK "http://europepmc.org/articles/PMC3621107/figure/F1/"}}{\fldrslt \cf3 \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
Fig. 1a}}). The size-tuning curve of isolated units (n=53; {\field{\*\fldinst{HYPERLINK "http://europepmc.org/articles/PMC3621107#SD2"}}{\fldrslt \cf3 \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
Suppl. Fig 2}}), i.e. the neuronal firing rate as a function of stimulus size, peaked at 22\'b12 degrees (preferred size) and progressively decreased with larger stimuli ({\field{\*\fldinst{HYPERLINK "http://europepmc.org/articles/PMC3621107/figure/F1/"}}{\fldrslt \cf3 \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
Fig. 1a,d}}), revealing marked surround suppression (average firing rates (FR): at baseline (FR
\fs20 \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
BL
\fs24 \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
): 0.47\'b10.11 Hz; to smallest stimulus (FR
\fs20 \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
SS
\fs24 \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
): 3.0 \'b11.0 Hz, to preferred stimulus (FR
\fs20 \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
PS
\fs24 \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
): 3.1\'b1 0.3 Hz; to largest stimulus (FR
\fs20 \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
LS
\fs24 \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
): 1.0\'b10.2 Hz; stimulus modulation index (SMI, computed as (FR
\fs20 \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
PS
\fs24 \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
 - FR
\fs20 \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
BL
\fs24 \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
) / FR
\fs20 \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
PS
\fs24 \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
): 0.87\'b10.03). The suppression index (SI), i.e. the difference between the peak response and the response to the largest stimulus, divided by the baseline subtracted peak response ((FR
\fs20 \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
PS
\fs24 \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
 - FR
\fs20 \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
LS
\fs24 \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
)/(FR
\fs20 \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
PS
\fs24 \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
 - FR
\fs20 \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
BL
\fs24 \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
); {\field{\*\fldinst{HYPERLINK "http://europepmc.org/articles/PMC3621107/figure/F1/"}}{\fldrslt \cf3 \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
Fig. 1a}}) averaged 0.9\'b10.1 (n=53; SI statistically significant in 33/53 units; permutation test; {\field{\*\fldinst{HYPERLINK "http://europepmc.org/articles/PMC3621107/figure/F1/"}}{\fldrslt \cf3 \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
Fig. 1d}}), indicating substantial suppression to large stimuli. Infrequent eye- movement occurring during running had little effect on the size tuning curve ({\field{\*\fldinst{HYPERLINK "http://europepmc.org/articles/PMC3621107#SD2"}}{\fldrslt \cf3 \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
Suppl. Fig. 3}}).\
\pard\pardeftab720
\cf3 \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
\

\itap1\trowd \taflags0 \trgaph108\trleft-108 \trbrdrt\brdrnil \trbrdrl\brdrnil \trbrdrt\brdrnil \trbrdrr\brdrnil 
\clvertalt \clshdrawnil \clwWidth6800\clftsWidth3 \clmart10 \clmarl10 \clmarb10 \clmarr10 \clbrdrt\brdrnil \clbrdrl\brdrnil \clbrdrb\brdrnil \clbrdrr\brdrnil \clpadl0 \clpadr0 \gaph\cellx8640
\pard\intbl\itap1\pardeftab720
\cf2 \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
\cell \lastrow\row
\pard\pardeftab720\sa166
\cf2 \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
If cortical circuits contribute to surround suppression they may involve the suppressive action of cortical inhibitory neurons. An inhibitory neuron lacking surround suppression and whose response increases with stimulus size would be a good candidate. In cats visual cortex, for example, fast spiking inhibitory neurons responding with higher firing rates to large as compared to small visual stimuli. We performed targeted loose patch recordings from inhibitory neurons in layer 2/3 of V1 in awake, running mice, using two photon laser scanning microscopy ({\field{\*\fldinst{HYPERLINK "http://europepmc.org/articles/PMC3621107/figure/F1/"}}{\fldrslt \cf3 \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
Fig.1b,c}}). Parvalbumin expressing neurons (PVs), a large class of cortical inhibitory neurons, were visualized in layer 2/3 by crossing a PV-Cre mouse line with a tdTomato reporter line. The size tuning curve of PVs peaked at 57\'b18 degrees (n=11) and showed marked surround suppression with larger stimuli (SI: 0.46\'b10.12 ; n=11; SI statistically significant in 6/11 cells; permutation test; {\field{\*\fldinst{HYPERLINK "http://europepmc.org/articles/PMC3621107/figure/F1/"}}{\fldrslt \cf3 \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
Fig 1b,e}}; FR
\fs20 \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
BL
\fs24 \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
: 9\'b12 Hz; FR
\fs20 \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
SS
\fs24 \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
: 27\'b17 Hz; FR
\fs20 \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
PS
\fs24 \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
: 45\'b111 Hz; FR
\fs20 \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
LS
\fs24 \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
: 26\'b18 Hz; SMI,: 0.74 \'b1 0.07; recorded PVs showed their characteristic \'93thin\'94 spikes shapes ({\field{\*\fldinst{HYPERLINK "http://europepmc.org/articles/PMC3621107#SD2"}}{\fldrslt \cf3 \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
Suppl. Fig. 2}}), confirming the accuracy of our targeting strategy). In striking contrast to PVs, somatostatin expressing neurons (SOMs), another large class of cortical inhibitory neurons (visualized by crossing a SOM-Cre line with a tdTomato-reporter line {\field{\*\fldinst{HYPERLINK "http://europepmc.org/articles/PMC3621107#R27"}}{\fldrslt \cf3 \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
27}}), completely lacked surround suppression (SI: 0.09\'b10.06 ; n = 8; SI stat. sign. in 0/8 cells ; permutation test; significantly different from PVs; p<0.03, rank sum test; {\field{\*\fldinst{HYPERLINK "http://europepmc.org/articles/PMC3621107/figure/F1/"}}{\fldrslt \cf3 \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
Fig. 1f}}). The size tuning curve of these neurons showed a monotonic increase or saturation in firing rate with stimulus size ({\field{\*\fldinst{HYPERLINK "http://europepmc.org/articles/PMC3621107/figure/F1/"}}{\fldrslt \cf3 \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
Fig 1c,f}}). While the smallest stimuli were relatively inefficient in driving SOMs (FR
\fs20 \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
BL
\fs24 \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
: 7\'b12 Hz; FR
\fs20 \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
SS
\fs24 \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
: 5\'b12 Hz), they robustly responded to large stimuli (FR
\fs20 \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
PS
\fs24 \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
: 26\'b12 Hz; preferred size: 86\'b13 degrees; different from PV, p<0.015, rank sum test; SMI: 0.75\'b10.05). These data demonstrate that in V1 size tuning can be very different between genetically distinct types of neurons. Furthermore, these data suggest that SOMs are potential candidates in the generation of cortical surround suppression.
\f1\b\fs34 \cf4 \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
\

\f0\b0\fs24 \cf2 \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
\
Excitation of SOMs by horizontal axons\
The above observations open two fundamental questions: First, what are the cortical circuits that enable SOMs, in contrast to other cortical neurons, not to be suppressed but rather 
\i \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
facilitated
\i0 \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
 by large stimuli? Second, do SOMs contribute to size tuning in V1? Both questions are addressed below.\
The two predominant excitatory inputs to layer 2/3 are vertically ascending axons from layer 4 and horizontal projecting axons from layer 2/3. Are SOMs equally excited by these two inputs? We recorded from layer 2/3 pyramidal cells (PCs), SOMs and PVs in coronal slices of V1 and selectively photo-activated (light ramp of 2s duration; 480 nm light) layer 4 excitatory cells that conditionally expressed Channelrhodopsin-2 (ChR2; {\field{\*\fldinst{HYPERLINK "http://europepmc.org/articles/PMC3621107#SD2"}}{\fldrslt \cf3 \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
Suppl. Fig 4}}). Layer 4 photo-stimulation generated excitatory charges in SOMs that were only 17 \'b1 5% (n=8) of those in simultaneously recorded PCs ({\field{\*\fldinst{HYPERLINK "http://europepmc.org/articles/PMC3621107/figure/F2/"}}{\fldrslt \cf3 \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
Fig. 2a}}); in contrast, excitatory charges generated in PVs were 250 \'b1 39% (n=8) of those generated in simultaneously recorded PCs ({\field{\*\fldinst{HYPERLINK "http://europepmc.org/articles/PMC3621107/figure/F2/"}}{\fldrslt \cf3 \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
Fig. 2b}}). These results were corroborated through ChR2-assisted circuit mapping {\field{\*\fldinst{HYPERLINK "http://europepmc.org/articles/PMC3621107#R29"}}{\fldrslt \cf3 \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
29}} ({\field{\*\fldinst{HYPERLINK "http://europepmc.org/articles/PMC3621107#SD2"}}{\fldrslt \cf3 \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
Suppl. Fig. 5}}). Thus, ascending layer 4 axon provide little excitation to SOMs. In striking contrast, photo-stimulation of layer 2/3 PCs (2 s light ramp duration) that selectively expressed ChR2 (see methods {\field{\*\fldinst{HYPERLINK "http://europepmc.org/articles/PMC3621107#R30"}}{\fldrslt \cf3 \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
30}}) produced substantial excitation of layer 2/3 SOMs ({\field{\*\fldinst{HYPERLINK "http://europepmc.org/articles/PMC3621107/figure/F2/"}}{\fldrslt \cf3 \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
Fig 2d}}): the excitation that SOMs received was in fact significantly larger than that received by simultaneously recorded PCs (241 \'b1 85%; n=7; p<0.05; {\field{\*\fldinst{HYPERLINK "http://europepmc.org/articles/PMC3621107/figure/F2/"}}{\fldrslt \cf3 \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
Fig. 2e}}; we selectively recorded from those PCs not expressing ChR2 in order to avoid contamination with photocurrents). Furthermore, while photo-stimulation of horizontal layer 2/3 projections was accompanied by strong disynaptic inhibition in PCs, only very little inhibition was recorded in SOMs ({\field{\*\fldinst{HYPERLINK "http://europepmc.org/articles/PMC3621107/figure/F2/"}}{\fldrslt \cf3 \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
Fig. 2e}}; the ratio of excitation to the sum of excitation and inhibition (E/(E+I)) was 0.11 \'b1 0.01 (n=10) in PCs versus 0.59 \'b1 0.06 (n= 11) in SOMs; p<0.05, {\field{\*\fldinst{HYPERLINK "http://europepmc.org/articles/PMC3621107/figure/F2/"}}{\fldrslt \cf3 \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
Fig. 2f}}). Thus, these results show that while layer 2/3 pyramidal and PVs receive substantial excitatory drive from ascending layer 4 axons, the main excitation to layer 2/3 SOMs are horizontal axons of layer 2/3.\
\pard\pardeftab720
\cf3 \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
\
\pard\pardeftab720\sl360

\f1\b\fs34 \cf4 \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
\
\pard\pardeftab720\sa166

\f0\b0\fs24 \cf2 \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
Size-dependent excitation of SOMs\
To ascertain that these horizontal axons are indeed responsible for the size-dependent recruitment of SOMs, we took advantage of the retinotopic organization of V1; we reasoned that because progressively larger visual stimuli presented 
\i \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
in vivo
\i0 \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
 will result in a progressively larger visually activated area in V1 we could approximate this expansion of activity by directly photo-stimulating progressively larger areas of V1. We performed loose patch recordings from SOMs in coronal slices of V1 expressing ChR2 in layer 2/3 PCs ({\field{\*\fldinst{HYPERLINK "http://europepmc.org/articles/PMC3621107/figure/F3/"}}{\fldrslt \cf3 \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
Fig 3a}}). The firing rate of SOMs increased as a function of the size of the light spot (range of sizes 180\'96900 \'b5m), similar to their increase in firing rate 
\i \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
in vivo
\i0 \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
 with increasing visual stimulus size ({\field{\*\fldinst{HYPERLINK "http://europepmc.org/articles/PMC3621107/figure/F3/"}}{\fldrslt \cf3 \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
Fig. 3a,b}}). Consistent with the increase in firing rate, the synaptic excitation received by SOMs increased with increasing light spot size ({\field{\*\fldinst{HYPERLINK "http://europepmc.org/articles/PMC3621107/figure/F3/"}}{\fldrslt \cf3 \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
Fig. 3a,b}}). If SOM dendrites were to span areas similar to the largest light-spot diameter, the progressive increase in firing rate with spot size could simply result from the direct photo-stimulation of synapses on the dendritic arborization of the recorded SOM. This was however not the case because even the smallest light spot used (180 \'b5m diameter), generating only ~25% of the maximal firing rate, covered already more than 95% of the entire SOM dendritic arborization ({\field{\*\fldinst{HYPERLINK "http://europepmc.org/articles/PMC3621107/figure/F3/"}}{\fldrslt \cf3 \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
Fig. 3b}}, see methods). Thus, the increase in SOM firing rate with spot size results from the recruitment of progressively more distant L2/3 PCs ({\field{\*\fldinst{HYPERLINK "http://europepmc.org/articles/PMC3621107/figure/F3/"}}{\fldrslt \cf3 \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
Fig. 3b}}, see methods). Furthermore, cutting horizontal axons with two vertical cuts through layer 2/3 on each side of the recorded SOMs (320 \'b125 \'b5m between cuts, centered on the cell; n=10; note that the distance between the cuts is larger than the horizontal dendritic extent of SOMs ) prevented the increase in firing rate with stimuli larger than the distance between the two cuts ({\field{\*\fldinst{HYPERLINK "http://europepmc.org/articles/PMC3621107#SD2"}}{\fldrslt \cf3 \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
Suppl. Fig. 6}}). Thus, by using horizontal layer 2/3 projections as their main excitatory drive, SOMs are recruited as a function of the activated V1 area, that is they sum activity in visual space.\
\pard\pardeftab720
\cf3 \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
\

\itap1\trowd \taflags0 \trgaph108\trleft-108 \trbrdrt\brdrnil \trbrdrl\brdrnil \trbrdrt\brdrnil \trbrdrr\brdrnil 
\clvertalt \clshdrawnil \clwWidth6800\clftsWidth3 \clmart10 \clmarl10 \clmarb10 \clmarr10 \clbrdrt\brdrnil \clbrdrl\brdrnil \clbrdrb\brdrnil \clbrdrr\brdrnil \clpadl0 \clpadr0 \gaph\cellx4320
\clvertalc \clshdrawnil \clbrdrt\brdrs\brdrw20\brdrcf5 \clbrdrl\brdrs\brdrw20\brdrcf5 \clbrdrb\brdrs\brdrw20\brdrcf5 \clbrdrr\brdrs\brdrw20\brdrcf5 \clpadl100 \clpadr100 \gaph\cellx8640
\pard\intbl\itap1\pardeftab720
\cf3 \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
\cell 
\pard\intbl\itap1\pardeftab720
\cf3 \cell \lastrow\row
\pard\pardeftab720\sa166
\cf2 \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
Is the size-dependent recruitment of SOMs a mechanism that could contribute to the suppression of PC firing to large stimuli? We recorded from PCs in coronal slices of V1 conditionally expressing ChR2 in layer 2/3. The firing rate of PCs was set to ~10 Hz by direct current injection ({\field{\*\fldinst{HYPERLINK "http://europepmc.org/articles/PMC3621107/figure/F3/"}}{\fldrslt \cf3 \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
Fig. 3c}}). A small light spot centered around the recorded PC reduced the firing rate and this suppression became progressively more pronounced as a larger area of layer 2/3 was activated by increasing the size of the light spot ({\field{\*\fldinst{HYPERLINK "http://europepmc.org/articles/PMC3621107/figure/F3/"}}{\fldrslt \cf3 \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
Fig. 3c}}). Consistent with the progressive suppression in firing rate, the inhibition received by PCs increased with increasing light spot size ({\field{\*\fldinst{HYPERLINK "http://europepmc.org/articles/PMC3621107/figure/F3/"}}{\fldrslt \cf3 \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
Fig. 3c,d}}). Finally, to establish that the inhibition generated in PCs upon photo activation of layer 2/3 was indeed due to the recruitment of SOMs and not any other interneuron type we optogenetically silenced SOMs (see methods) while monitoring the inhibition in PCs during photoactivation of layer 2/3 ({\field{\*\fldinst{HYPERLINK "http://europepmc.org/articles/PMC3621107/figure/F3/"}}{\fldrslt \cf3 \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
Fig. 3e}}). Photo-stimulation of layer 2/3 to activate PCs generated strong firing in SOMs and large inhibitory currents in simultaneously recorded PCs, consistent with the results reported above ({\field{\*\fldinst{HYPERLINK "http://europepmc.org/articles/PMC3621107/figure/F3/"}}{\fldrslt \cf3 \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
Fig. 3e}}). Strikingly, concomitant optogenetic silencing of SOMs (100% reduction of firing; n= 6) strongly reduced the inhibitory currents in PCs (80 \'b1 4% reduction; n=8 p<0.05, {\field{\*\fldinst{HYPERLINK "http://europepmc.org/articles/PMC3621107/figure/F3/"}}{\fldrslt \cf3 \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
Fig. 3e,f}}).\
Thus, the stimulus-size dependent recruitment of SOMs generates strong inhibition in layer 2/3 PCs and efficiently suppresses their firing rate ({\field{\*\fldinst{HYPERLINK "http://europepmc.org/articles/PMC3621107/figure/F3/"}}{\fldrslt \cf3 \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
Fig. 3g}}).\
\pard\pardeftab720\sa166

\f1\b\fs34 \cf4 \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
\
\pard\pardeftab720\sa166

\f0\b0\fs24 \cf2 \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
SOMs contribute to surround suppression\
These data provide a plausible mechanism by which SOMs could contribute to surround suppression of layer 2/3 PCs in vivo. Furthermore, consistent with a possible contribution of SOMs to surround suppression, under anesthesia, a situation in which surround suppression is compromised (see above and {\field{\*\fldinst{HYPERLINK "http://europepmc.org/articles/PMC3621107#SD2"}}{\fldrslt \cf3 \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
Suppl. Fig. 1}}) the firing rate of SOMs was reduced ten fold (from 26 \'b1 2 Hz, n=8 to 2.7\'b1 0.4 Hz, n= 10), much more than that of single units or PVs ({\field{\*\fldinst{HYPERLINK "http://europepmc.org/articles/PMC3621107#SD2"}}{\fldrslt \cf3 \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
Suppl. Fig. 1}}). To directly test for the involvement of SOMs in surround suppression we conditionally expressed the light-sensitive hyperpolarizing opsin archaerhodopsin (Arch) in V1 using viral injection of a flexed Arch vector into SOM-Cre mice (71 \'b1 2% of cells infected, n = 4 animals, {\field{\*\fldinst{HYPERLINK "http://europepmc.org/articles/PMC3621107/figure/F4/"}}{\fldrslt \cf3 \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
Fig. 4b}} and see methods). Illumination of the cortical surface efficiently reduced the visually evoked activity of Arch-expressing layer 2/3 SOMs (80 \'b1 1% suppression, n = 4, p<0.05; {\field{\*\fldinst{HYPERLINK "http://europepmc.org/articles/PMC3621107#SD2"}}{\fldrslt \cf3 \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
Supp. Fig. 7}}),. To determine the impact of SOMs on size tuning in layer 2/3 we performed extracellular recordings as described above and alternated control trials (visual stimulus only) with trials in which SOMs were photo-hyperpolarized ({\field{\*\fldinst{HYPERLINK "http://europepmc.org/articles/PMC3621107/figure/F4/"}}{\fldrslt \cf3 \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
Fig. 4}}). Photo-hyperpolarization of SOMs significantly reduced surround suppression of layer 2/3 neurons by 30 \'b1 10% (n=28; p < 0.00022, paired signed rank test; Fig.4c-e; photo-hyperpolarization of SOMs had no significant effect on baseline firing rates \uc0\u8722 9\'b117%; n=13; p>0.18). Nearly all units (25/28) showed a decrease in SI ({\field{\*\fldinst{HYPERLINK "http://europepmc.org/articles/PMC3621107/figure/F4/"}}{\fldrslt \cf3 \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
Fig. 4e}}) and in 10/25 units the decrease was individually significant (p< 0.05 permutation test). The reduction of SI resulted from the fact that SOM photo-hyperpolarization facilitated the response to large visual stimuli more than to small visual stimuli: The response ratio (the ratio of the firing rate in the illumination condition divided by firing rate in the control condition) increased with the size of the stimulus ({\field{\*\fldinst{HYPERLINK "http://europepmc.org/articles/PMC3621107/figure/F4/"}}{\fldrslt \cf3 \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
Fig. 4f}}). Indeed, while the response to stimuli smaller or equal to the preferred size was not facilitated (\uc0\u8722 7\'b1 7%, p > 0.45, paired signed rank test; n=28; FR
\fs20 \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
PS, CTRL
\fs24 \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
 = 4.9 \'b1 1.5 Hz, FR
\fs20 \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
PS, LED
\fs24 \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
 = 4.6 \'b11.9 Hz, p >0.63, paired signed rank test) the response to the stimuli larger than the preferred size was facilitated by 74\'b119 % (p<0.0011, paired signed rank test; n=28; {\field{\*\fldinst{HYPERLINK "http://europepmc.org/articles/PMC3621107/figure/F4/"}}{\fldrslt \cf3 \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
Fig. 4f}}). This lack of facilitation of responses to smaller visual stimuli was not due to saturation (i.e. a ceiling effect). In fact, firing rates to stimuli smaller or equal to the preferred one were consistently facilitated less than similar firing rates elicited by stimuli larger than the preferred one ({\field{\*\fldinst{HYPERLINK "http://europepmc.org/articles/PMC3621107#SD2"}}{\fldrslt \cf3 \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
Supp. Fig. 8}}). The stronger impact of SOM photo-hyperpolarization on cortical responses to large stimuli is thus consistent with the preferential activation of SOMs by large stimuli ({\field{\*\fldinst{HYPERLINK "http://europepmc.org/articles/PMC3621107/figure/F1/"}}{\fldrslt \cf3 \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
Fig. 1c}}). Thus, by inhibiting layer 2/3 neurons as a function of stimulus size SOMs generate an inhibitory surround ({\field{\*\fldinst{HYPERLINK "http://europepmc.org/articles/PMC3621107/figure/F4/"}}{\fldrslt \cf3 \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
Fig. 4g}}).\
\pard\pardeftab720

\f1\b\fs34 \cf4 \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
\
\pard\pardeftab720\sa166

\f0\b0\fs24 \cf2 \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
\
Discussion\
This study describes a cortical circuit that significantly contributes to surround suppression of layer 2/3 cells and identify a specific type of inhibitory neuron, the SOM, as a key mediator of this phenomenon. This circuit is thus likely to be involved in the contextual modulation of cortical responses to visual stimuli. The differential recruitment of PCs in superficial layers by ascending inputs and of SOMs by horizontal inputs underscores the fact that distinct neuron types are differentially integrated in the excitatory cortical circuit. These differences lead to different tuning properties as highlighted here by the distinct size-tuning curves. Thus, while small stimuli efficiently drive layer 2/3 PCs through the activation of ascending vertical inputs, SOMs, by summing activity in space via horizontal inputs, are preferentially driven by larger stimuli. As a consequence, the larger the stimulus, the stronger the SOM mediated suppression of PCs.\
How can SOMs increase their firing as a function of stimulus size if they suppress layer 2/3 PCs, i.e. their main source of excitation? It is likely that the number of PCs recruited by the outer edge of the stimulus (an annulus that grows linearly with the diameter of the stimulus) more than compensate for the reduction in PC firing at the center of the stimulus.\
Photo-hyperpolarization of SOMs reduces but does not abolish surround suppression. While this may be due in part to incomplete silencing of SOMs, surround suppression is also likely relayed to cortical layer 2/3 by earlier stages of visual processing and other types of inhibitory neurons or circuits may also contribute to surround suppression.\
The preferential recruitment of SOMs by horizontal excitatory projections is consistent with the long hypothesized role of these projections in size tuning. In cortical layers with less extensive horizontal connectivity, size tuning may rely on different mechanisms or be entirely inherited from pre-cortical areas. Importantly, because SOMs are tuned to the orientation of visual stimuli, they could account for the orientation dependence of surround suppression. Furthermore, SOMs may respond differentially to specific stimulus properties, like contrast, and thus also contribute to the contrast dependence of surround suppression. It is likely that a connectivity pattern similar to what is described here may be present in other cortical areas as well, and thus contribute to suppressive surround in several sensory and non-sensory modalities.
\f1\b\fs34 \cf4 \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
\

\f0\b0\fs24 \cf2 \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
\
Methods Summary\
Experiments were performed in accordance to the regulations of the IACUC at UCSD. Mice (except for {\field{\*\fldinst{HYPERLINK "http://europepmc.org/articles/PMC3621107/figure/F3/"}}{\fldrslt \cf3 \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
Fig. 3a,b}}) were heterozygous for SOM-IRES-CRE (Jackson lab stock #013044) or PV-CRE (#008069) and the reporter allele Rosa-LSL-tdTOMATO (Allen Institute line Ai9, Jackson Labs #007905). For {\field{\*\fldinst{HYPERLINK "http://europepmc.org/articles/PMC3621107/figure/F3/"}}{\fldrslt \cf3 \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
Fig. 3a,b}} mice were positive for Scnn1a-tg3-CRE (Jackson labs #009613) and crossed with to the Gin (#003718) or B13 line. For 
\i \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
in vivo
\i0 \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
 experiments mice were implanted with a custom head plate and habituated to head-fixation while running on a free spinning circular treadmill. For targeted recording 
\i \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
in vivo
\i0 \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
 tdTomato-expressing neurons were visualized by two photon microscopy and contacted by a glass electrode containing Alexfluor 488. Extracellular unit recording was performed via 16 channel silicon probes (Neuronexus). Single units were isolated using custom spike sorting software (Kleinfeld lab). We conditionally expressed ChR2 by 
\i \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
in utero
\i0 \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
 electroporation (for layer 2/3) or via a CRE-depednent AAV in Scnn1a-tg3-CRE (for layer 4). Arch or eNpHR were expressed via CRE-dependent AAVs in SOM- and PV-IRES-CRE mice. Visual stimuli were generated by custom software (Psych Toolbox) and presented on a gamma-corrected LCD monitor 15 cm from the mouse. Photostimulation 
\i \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
in vivo
\i0 \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
 was performed via fiber-coupled LEDs (Doric lenses). Photostimulation in vitro was via a combination of fiber-coupled LEDs, or LEDs mounted and coupled to an epifluorescence microscope (Olympus BX51). eNpHR was activated by a shuttered arc-lamp. Slice preparation and intracellular recording followed previous protocols. Data acquisition, visual stimulation, and statistical analysis was performed in the Igor Pro and Matlab environments.\
}