{\rtf1\ansi\ansicpg1252\cocoartf1347\cocoasubrtf570
{\fonttbl\f0\fswiss\fcharset0 ArialMT;\f1\froman\fcharset0 TimesNewRomanPSMT;}
{\colortbl;\red255\green255\blue255;\red133\green68\blue40;\red80\green22\blue124;\red191\green191\blue191;
\red94\green49\blue30;}
{\*\listtable{\list\listtemplateid1\listhybrid{\listlevel\levelnfc0\levelnfcn0\leveljc0\leveljcn0\levelfollow0\levelstartat1\levelspace360\levelindent0{\*\levelmarker \{decimal\}.}{\leveltext\leveltemplateid1\'02\'00.;}{\levelnumbers\'01;}\fi-360\li720\lin720 }{\listname ;}\listid1}}
{\*\listoverridetable{\listoverride\listid1\listoverridecount0\ls1}}
\margl1440\margr1440\vieww14420\viewh13220\viewkind0
\deftab720
\pard\pardeftab720\sl340

\f0\b\fs32 \cf2 \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
Introduction\
\pard\pardeftab720\sl439\sa221

\f1\b0 \cf0 \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
Lithium diisopropylamide (LDA) is prominent in organic synthesis. In a comprehensive survey of the frequency that reagents were used in approximately 500 natural product syntheses, LDA came out number one. This prevalence is one of the two reasons why we have focused on understanding the structure-reactivity relationships in LDA-mediated reactions. The other is that LDA offers a highly tractable template with which to study the influence of aggregation and solvation on organolithium reaction mechanisms. The numerous synthetic applications of LDA combine with its complex coordination chemistry to produce considerable mechanistic variations.\
To understand the source of the complexity\'97if not the complexity itself\'97we present {\field{\*\fldinst{HYPERLINK "http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC3184385/figure/F2/"}}{\fldrslt \cf3 \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
\ul \ulc3 Scheme 1}}, which summarizes the deaggregation of disolvated LDA dimer 
\b \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
1
\b0 \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
 to trisolvated monomer 
\b \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
6
\b0 \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
. For many reactions, typically those that are conveniently monitored between 0 \'b0C and \uc0\u8722 60 \'b0C, the aggregates equilibrate very quickly compared to the rate of reaction being studied. Under conditions of fully established equilibria, all aggregates are available to react with the substrate, and studies have shown that many do. During the course of our research we began to believe that a coherent picture of reactivity had emerged, which prompted us to summarize the results in a review.\cf3 \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
\
\cf0 \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
Recent rate studies, however, began to uncover aberrant behaviors that failed to follow conventional patterns. For example, during studies of imine metalations in which the relative reactivities spanned an approximate 60,000-fold range, the most reactive imine required that the reaction temperature be reduced to \uc0\u8722 78 \'b0C ({\field{\*\fldinst{HYPERLINK "http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC3184385/#FD1"}}{\fldrslt \cf3 \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
\ul \ulc3 eq 1}}).{\field{\*\fldinst{HYPERLINK "http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC3184385/#R4"}}{\fldrslt 
\fs28 \cf3 \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
\ul \ulc3 4}} This was the first time that we had investigated the kinetics of an LDA-mediated metalation at \uc0\u8722 78 \'b0C, and something odd happened: the loss of imine failed to follow a normal (first-order) decay, instead displaying a persistent linearity over the first two half lives. We noted but largely ignored this observation.{\field{\*\fldinst{HYPERLINK "http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC3184385/#R4"}}{\fldrslt 
\fs28 \cf3 \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
\ul \ulc3 4}} Soon thereafter, odd substrate decays began appearing in disparate reactions including a host of ortholithiations{\field{\*\fldinst{HYPERLINK "http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC3184385/#R5"}}{\fldrslt 
\fs28 \cf3 \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
\ul \ulc3 5}}
\fs28 \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
,{\field{\*\fldinst{HYPERLINK "http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC3184385/#R6"}}{\fldrslt \cf3 \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
\ul \ulc3 6}},{\field{\*\fldinst{HYPERLINK "http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC3184385/#R7"}}{\fldrslt \cf3 \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
\ul \ulc3 7}}
\fs32 \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
 (such as {\field{\*\fldinst{HYPERLINK "http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC3184385/#FD2"}}{\fldrslt \cf3 \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
\ul \ulc3 eqs 2}} and {\field{\*\fldinst{HYPERLINK "http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC3184385/#FD3"}}{\fldrslt \cf3 \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
\ul \ulc3 3}}){\field{\*\fldinst{HYPERLINK "http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC3184385/#R8"}}{\fldrslt 
\fs28 \cf3 \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
\ul \ulc3 8}} and even 1,4-additions of LDA to unsaturated esters ({\field{\*\fldinst{HYPERLINK "http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC3184385/#FD4"}}{\fldrslt \cf3 \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
\ul \ulc3 eq 4}}).{\field{\*\fldinst{HYPERLINK "http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC3184385/#R9"}}{\fldrslt 
\fs28 \cf3 \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
\ul \ulc3 9}} 
\i \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
All
\i0 \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
 shared two common traits: they were carried out using LDA in tetrahydrofuran (THF) at \uc0\u8722 78 \'b0C, and they displayed hypersensitivities to traces of LiCl (as little as 1.0 ppm).\

\itap1\trowd \taflags0 \trgaph108\trleft-108 \trbrdrt\brdrnil \trbrdrl\brdrnil \trbrdrt\brdrnil \trbrdrr\brdrnil 
\clvertalt \clshdrawnil \clbrdrt\brdrnil \clbrdrl\brdrnil \clbrdrb\brdrnil \clbrdrr\brdrnil \clpadl0 \clpadr0 \gaph\cellx4320
\clvertalc \clshdrawnil \clbrdrt\brdrs\brdrw20\brdrcf4 \clbrdrl\brdrs\brdrw20\brdrcf4 \clbrdrb\brdrs\brdrw20\brdrcf4 \clbrdrr\brdrs\brdrw20\brdrcf4 \clpadl100 \clpadr100 \gaph\cellx8640
\pard\intbl\itap1\pardeftab720
\cf0 \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
\cell 

\itap2\trowd \taflags4 \trgaph108\trleft-108 \tamart443 \tamarb443 \trbrdrt\brdrnil \trbrdrl\brdrnil \trbrdrt\brdrnil \trbrdrr\brdrnil 
\clvertalc \clshdrawnil \clwWidth12400\clftsWidth3 \clmart10 \clmarl10 \clmarb10 \clmarr10 \clbrdrt\brdrnil \clbrdrl\brdrnil \clbrdrb\brdrnil \clbrdrr\brdrnil \clpadl0 \clpadr0 \gaph\cellx8640
\pard\intbl\itap2\pardeftab720\sl439
\cf0 \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
Mechanistic studies indicated that LDA aggregate exchanges were dictating the reaction rate,{\field{\*\fldinst{HYPERLINK "http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC3184385/#R10"}}{\fldrslt 
\fs28 \cf3 \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
\ul \ulc3 10}} causing the emerging mechanistic picture to be quite vexing. The odd linear decays observed for ortholithiations of aryl carbamates ({\field{\*\fldinst{HYPERLINK "http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC3184385/#FD2"}}{\fldrslt \cf3 \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
\ul \ulc3 eq 2}})\'97apparent zeroth-order substrate dependencies consistent with ratelimiting deaggregation of LDA dimer\'97were traced instead to virulent autocatalysis and the intervention of highly reactive mixed aggregates.{\field{\*\fldinst{HYPERLINK "http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC3184385/#R6"}}{\fldrslt 
\fs28 \cf3 \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
\ul \ulc3 6}} Unusual time-dependent changes in the concentration of LDA-ArLi mixed dimers attested to non-equilibrium conditions. The ortholithiation in {\field{\*\fldinst{HYPERLINK "http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC3184385/#FD3"}}{\fldrslt \cf3 \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
\ul \ulc3 eq 3}} was found to be both autocatalyzed{\field{\*\fldinst{HYPERLINK "http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC3184385/#R11"}}{\fldrslt 
\fs28 \cf3 \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
\ul \ulc3 11}}
\fs28 \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
,{\field{\*\fldinst{HYPERLINK "http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC3184385/#R12"}}{\fldrslt \cf3 \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
\ul \ulc3 12}}
\fs32 \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
 and LiCl catalyzed, but the rate-limiting step of the uncatalyzed metalation involved rate-limiting deaggregation\'97a true zeroth-order substrate dependence\'97via a disolvated-dimer-based transition structure. Post-rate-limiting lithiation was shown to occur via a fleeting dimer-based rather than a monomer-based intermediate. Both autocatalysis and LiCl catalysis, by contrast, were shown to divert the reaction through a monomer-based mechanism. Seemingly analogous linear decays for 1,4-additions of LDA to unsaturated esters ({\field{\*\fldinst{HYPERLINK "http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC3184385/#FD4"}}{\fldrslt \cf3 \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
\ul \ulc3 eq 4}}) also involved a rate-limiting deaggregation of LDA, but it was found to occur via a 
\i \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
trisolvated
\i0 \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
-dimer-based transition structure rather than via a disolvated dimer seen for ortholithiation.{\field{\*\fldinst{HYPERLINK "http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC3184385/#R9"}}{\fldrslt 
\fs28 \cf3 \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
\ul \ulc3 9}} Different substrates were reacting via different rate-limiting deaggregations! The post-rate-limiting 1,4-additions were shown to proceed via an LDA-monomer-based pathway. Highly muted autocatalysis and dramatic catalysis by LiCl were traced explicitly to catalyzed deaggregation to the same LDA monomer.{\field{\*\fldinst{HYPERLINK "http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC3184385/#R13"}}{\fldrslt 
\fs28 \cf3 \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
\ul \ulc3 13}}\nestcell \lastrow\nestrow
\pard\intbl\itap1\pardeftab720\sl439\sa221
\cf0 \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
Although in isolation the case studies are logical, considered together they paint a chaotic mechanistic picture. We began to realize that a complete understanding of LDA-mediated reactions under these highly prevalent conditions\'97LDA/THF/\uc0\u8722 78 \'b0C\'97demand a more general and comprehensive understanding of LDA deaggregation. Although aggregation dynamics have received some attention, detailed analyses of organolithium deaggregations are absent.{\field{\*\fldinst{HYPERLINK "http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC3184385/#R14"}}{\fldrslt 
\fs28 \cf3 \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
\ul \ulc3 14}}\
In this paper computational studies show that the intermediates in {\field{\*\fldinst{HYPERLINK "http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC3184385/figure/F2/"}}{\fldrslt \cf3 \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
\ul \ulc3 Scheme 1}} are legitimate minima en route from the resting state of LDA (
\b \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
1
\b0 \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
){\field{\*\fldinst{HYPERLINK "http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC3184385/#R15"}}{\fldrslt 
\fs28 \cf3 \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
\ul \ulc3 15}} to fleeting trisolvated monomer 
\b \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
6
\b0 \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
. Moreover, conformational effects on the stabilities of 
\b \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
1
\b0 \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
\'96
\b \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
6
\b0 \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
 as well as on the activation barriers to exchange are surprising in both detail and implication.{\field{\*\fldinst{HYPERLINK "http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC3184385/#R16"}}{\fldrslt 
\fs28 \cf3 \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
\ul \ulc3 16}}\
\pard\intbl\itap1\pardeftab720\sl439

\f0\fs28 \cf0 \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
\
\pard\intbl\itap1\pardeftab720\sl340

\b\fs32 \cf2 \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
Results\
\pard\intbl\itap1\pardeftab720\sl340\sa179

\fs28 \cf5 \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
General\
\pard\intbl\itap1\pardeftab720\sl439\sa221

\f1\b0\fs32 \cf0 \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
All structures were computed using diisopropylamido groups and THF ligands without structural approximations. Density functional theory (DFT) and MP2 calculations were performed with the Gaussian 09 package using Gaussview 5.0 and WebMO as a graphical user interface.{\field{\*\fldinst{HYPERLINK "http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC3184385/#R17"}}{\fldrslt 
\fs28 \cf3 \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
\ul \ulc3 17}} Geometry optimizations and frequency calculations were performed at the B3LYP level of theory using the 6\'9631G(d) and 6\'9631+G(d) Pople basis sets. Free energies were calculated from an MP2-derived single-point energy [6\'9631G(d) basis set] and a B3LYP-derived thermal correction [6\'9631G(d)] at 195 K (\uc0\u8722 78 \'b0C) and 1 atm.{\field{\*\fldinst{HYPERLINK "http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC3184385/#R18"}}{\fldrslt 
\fs28 \cf3 \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
\ul \ulc3 18}} (MP2 corrections seem to provide superior correlations of theory and experiment, especially for the most highly solvated forms of LDA.){\field{\*\fldinst{HYPERLINK "http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC3184385/#R19"}}{\fldrslt 
\fs28 \cf3 \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
\ul \ulc3 19}} Basis set superposition errors (BSSE){\field{\*\fldinst{HYPERLINK "http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC3184385/#R20"}}{\fldrslt 
\fs28 \cf3 \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
\ul \ulc3 20}} were corrected using the counterpoise method{\field{\*\fldinst{HYPERLINK "http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC3184385/#R21"}}{\fldrslt 
\fs28 \cf3 \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
\ul \ulc3 21}}to test for energy errors arising from incomplete basis sets. Geometries that are particularly sensitive to BSSE will be discussed. Transition structures were confirmed by the existence of a single imaginary frequency, and intrinsic reaction coordinate (IRC) calculations{\field{\*\fldinst{HYPERLINK "http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC3184385/#R22"}}{\fldrslt 
\fs28 \cf3 \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
\ul \ulc3 22}} confirm the connection with specific minima. The energy surface describing LDA deaggregation is summarized in {\field{\*\fldinst{HYPERLINK "http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC3184385/figure/F3/"}}{\fldrslt \cf3 \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
\ul \ulc3 Scheme 2}}.\
\pard\intbl\itap1\pardeftab720\sl439
\cf3 \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
\

\itap2\trowd \taflags0 \trgaph108\trleft-108 \trbrdrt\brdrnil \trbrdrl\brdrnil \trbrdrt\brdrnil \trbrdrr\brdrnil 
\clvertalt \clshdrawnil \clwWidth1260\clftsWidth3 \clmart10 \clmarl10 \clmarb10 \clmarr10 \clbrdrt\brdrnil \clbrdrl\brdrnil \clbrdrb\brdrnil \clbrdrr\brdrnil \clpadl0 \clpadr0 \gaph\cellx8640
\pard\intbl\itap2\pardeftab720\sl439
\cf0 \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
\nestcell \lastrow\nestrow
\pard\intbl\itap1\pardeftab720\sl340\sa179

\f0\b\fs28 \cf5 \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
Minima\
\pard\intbl\itap1\pardeftab720\sl439\sa221

\f1\b0\fs32 \cf0 \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
Moving from left to right in {\field{\*\fldinst{HYPERLINK "http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC3184385/figure/F3/"}}{\fldrslt \cf3 \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
\ul \ulc3 Scheme 2}} corresponds to the stepwise conversion of known disolvated dimer
\b \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
1{\field{\*\fldinst{HYPERLINK "http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC3184385/#R15"}}{\fldrslt 
\b0\fs28 \cf3 \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
\ul \ulc3 15}}
\b0 \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
 (and related less symmetric cyclic dimers) through open dimers to give monomers as indicated in grey scale along the reaction coordinate (
\i \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
x
\i0 \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
 axis). The key minima in {\field{\*\fldinst{HYPERLINK "http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC3184385/figure/F3/"}}{\fldrslt \cf3 \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
\ul \ulc3 Scheme 2}} correspond to structures 
\b \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
1
\b0 \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
\'96
\b \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
6
\b0 \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
 in {\field{\*\fldinst{HYPERLINK "http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC3184385/figure/F2/"}}{\fldrslt \cf3 \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
\ul \ulc3 Scheme 1}}. Bridged dimer 
\b \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
7
\b0 \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
 and disolvated monomer 
\b \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
8
\b0 \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
 precede minima corresponding to monomer 
\b \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
6
\b0 \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
. The shaded regions correspond to conformational ensembles of di- and trisolvated open dimers 
\b \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
4
\b0 \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
 and 
\b \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
5
\b0 \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
.{\field{\*\fldinst{HYPERLINK "http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC3184385/#R23"}}{\fldrslt 
\fs28 \cf3 \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
\ul \ulc3 23}}Energy levels inside the shaded region correspond to distinct conformers. The lines illustrate connections between transition structures and specific conformational isomers of minima. Minima 
\b \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
2
\b0 \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
 and 
\b \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
3
\b0 \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
 are linked directly because the transformation is computed to be barrierless.\
The steric demands and chirality of the isopropyl group render the potential energy surface of LDA aggregation and solvation rich in detail. Diisopropylamido moieties display two conformational minima corresponding to mirror images ({\field{\*\fldinst{HYPERLINK "http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC3184385/#FD5"}}{\fldrslt \cf3 \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
\ul \ulc3 eq 5}}).{\field{\*\fldinst{HYPERLINK "http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC3184385/#R24"}}{\fldrslt 
\fs28 \cf3 \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
\ul \ulc3 24}} Consequently, LDA dimers can exist as both homochiral and heterochiral (meso) diastereomers. A number of comparisons, however, show that in the open dimers and open dimer-based transition structures, the two diisopropylamido moieties do not communicate, resulting in comparable energies. The energies in {\field{\*\fldinst{HYPERLINK "http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC3184385/figure/F3/"}}{\fldrslt \cf3 \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
\ul \ulc3 Scheme 2}} derive from the homochiral form. In the cyclic dimers (
\b \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
1
\b0 \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
, 
\b \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
2
\b0 \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
, and 
\b \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
3
\b0 \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
), the homochiral form is preferred over the heterochiral (meso) form by \uc0\u8776 1 kcal/mol. The computed structure of 
\b \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
1
\b0 \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
 matches the crystal structure.\

\itap2\trowd \taflags0 \trgaph108\trleft-108 \trbrdrt\brdrnil \trbrdrl\brdrnil \trbrdrt\brdrnil \trbrdrr\brdrnil 
\clvertalt \clshdrawnil \clbrdrt\brdrnil \clbrdrl\brdrnil \clbrdrb\brdrnil \clbrdrr\brdrnil \clpadl0 \clpadr0 \gaph\cellx4320
\clvertalc \clshdrawnil \clbrdrt\brdrs\brdrw20\brdrcf4 \clbrdrl\brdrs\brdrw20\brdrcf4 \clbrdrb\brdrs\brdrw20\brdrcf4 \clbrdrr\brdrs\brdrw20\brdrcf4 \clpadl100 \clpadr100 \gaph\cellx8640
\pard\intbl\itap2\pardeftab720
\cf0 \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
\nestcell 

\itap3\trowd \taflags4 \trgaph108\trleft-108 \tamart443 \tamarb443 \trbrdrt\brdrnil \trbrdrl\brdrnil \trbrdrt\brdrnil \trbrdrr\brdrnil 
\clvertalc \clshdrawnil \clwWidth12400\clftsWidth3 \clmart10 \clmarl10 \clmarb10 \clmarr10 \clbrdrt\brdrnil \clbrdrl\brdrnil \clbrdrb\brdrnil \clbrdrr\brdrnil \clpadl0 \clpadr0 \gaph\cellx4320
\clvertalc \clshdrawnil \clbrdrt\brdrs\brdrw20\brdrcf4 \clbrdrl\brdrs\brdrw20\brdrcf4 \clbrdrb\brdrs\brdrw20\brdrcf4 \clbrdrr\brdrs\brdrw20\brdrcf4 \clpadl100 \clpadr100 \gaph\cellx8640
\pard\intbl\itap3\pardeftab720\sl439
\cf0 \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
\nestcell 
\pard\intbl\itap3\pardeftab720\sl439
\cf0 \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
\shad\shadx20\shady-20\shadr200\shado255 \shadc0 \nestcell \lastrow\nestrow
\pard\intbl\itap2\pardeftab720\sl439\sa221
\cf0 \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
\shad0 Two spatial relationships are prominent in open dimers. By sighting along the axis defined by the two nitrogen atoms (dashed line in {\field{\*\fldinst{HYPERLINK "http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC3184385/figure/F4/"}}{\fldrslt \cf3 \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
\ul \ulc3 Scheme 3}}), we loosely define a pseudo dihedral angle (\uc0\u969 
\fs28 \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
CC
\fs32 \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
) to describe conformational isomerism arising from the rotational orientations of the two diisopropylamido moieties. These orientations are most easily envisioned by imagining rotation about the N\'96Li bond of the terminal diisopropylamido group. We define a second, standard dihedral angle (\uc0\u969 
\fs28 \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
LiO
\fs32 \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
) that describes the THF orientations as defined by rotation about the N\'96Li bond to the terminal lithium. The open dimers are organized by dihedral angles \uc0\u969 
\fs28 \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
CC
\fs32 \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
 and \uc0\u969 
\fs28 \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
LiO
\fs32 \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
 in {\field{\*\fldinst{HYPERLINK "http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC3184385/#SD1"}}{\fldrslt \cf3 \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
\ul \ulc3 supporting information}}. Other minor conformational adjustments, such as the rotations about the individual THF ligands, coincide with these primary conformational changes.\
\pard\intbl\itap2\pardeftab720\sl439
\cf0 \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
We sampled the conformers of disolvated open dimers 
\b \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
4
\b0 \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
 by incrementally varying \uc0\u969 
\fs28 \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
CC
\fs32 \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
. Structures 
\b \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
4a
\b0 \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
\'96
\b \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
4e
\b0 \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
 ({\field{\*\fldinst{HYPERLINK "http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC3184385/figure/F5/"}}{\fldrslt \cf3 \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
\ul \ulc3 Scheme 4}}) are representative of the eight conformers available through a 180\'b0 rotation, and they span a 2\'963 kcal/mol range. (The three omitted do not include any exceptional structural features.) All conformers fall within an approximate 90\'b0 rotation. The conversion of 
\b \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
4e
\b0 \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
 to 
\b \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
4a
\b0 \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
 to complete the cycle requires an approximate 90\'b0 rotation of the diisopropylamido group, yet 
\i \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
no
\i0 \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
 minima are detectable. Changes in \uc0\u969 
\fs28 \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
CC
\fs32 \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
 are accompanied by changes in \uc0\u969 
\fs28 \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
LiO
\fs32 \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
 corresponding to seemingly fluid rotations about the THF-bearing N\'96Li bond that loosely approximate three orientations. We can find no simple (predictable) relationship between \uc0\u969 
\fs28 \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
CC
\fs32 \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
 and \uc0\u969 
\fs28 \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
LiO
\fs32 \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
.\cf3 \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
\

\itap3\trowd \taflags0 \trgaph108\trleft-108 \trbrdrt\brdrnil \trbrdrl\brdrnil \trbrdrt\brdrnil \trbrdrr\brdrnil 
\clvertalt \clshdrawnil \clwWidth1260\clftsWidth3 \clmart10 \clmarl10 \clmarb10 \clmarr10 \clbrdrt\brdrnil \clbrdrl\brdrnil \clbrdrb\brdrnil \clbrdrr\brdrnil \clpadl0 \clpadr0 \gaph\cellx4320
\clvertalc \clshdrawnil \clbrdrt\brdrs\brdrw20\brdrcf4 \clbrdrl\brdrs\brdrw20\brdrcf4 \clbrdrb\brdrs\brdrw20\brdrcf4 \clbrdrr\brdrs\brdrw20\brdrcf4 \clpadl100 \clpadr100 \gaph\cellx8640
\pard\intbl\itap3\pardeftab720
\cf3 \nestcell 
\pard\intbl\itap3\pardeftab720\sl439
\cf0 \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
\nestcell \lastrow\nestrow
\pard\intbl\itap2\pardeftab720\sl439\sa221
\cf0 \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
Analogous conformers are observed for trisolvated open dimers ({\field{\*\fldinst{HYPERLINK "http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC3184385/figure/F6/"}}{\fldrslt \cf3 \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
\ul \ulc3 Scheme 5}}), yet gearing arising from the high steric demands seems to allow for fewer minima at larger increments of \uc0\u969 
\fs28 \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
CC
\fs32 \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
. The relative energies of the five conformers span an 8 kcal/mol range. All show a reduction of the N\'96Li\'96N angle to \uc0\u8776 165\'b0 owing to solvation of the internal lithium. The conformers fit into three groups: (1) 
\b \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
5a
\b0 \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
 is unique in that the THF ligand on the interior lithium is orthogonal relative to the orientation in the other four conformers. Conformers 
\b \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
5b
\b0 \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
 and 
\b \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
5c
\b0 \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
 show evidence of diisopropylamido distortion and reduction of the Li\'96N\'96Li angle when compared with the disolvates that we attribute to buttressing. Conformers 
\b \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
5d
\b0 \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
 and 
\b \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
5e
\b0 \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
 seem most akin to the disolvated dimers in {\field{\*\fldinst{HYPERLINK "http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC3184385/figure/F5/"}}{\fldrslt \cf3 \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
\ul \ulc3 Scheme 4}}.\cf3 \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
\

\itap3\trowd \taflags0 \trgaph108\trleft-108 \trbrdrt\brdrnil \trbrdrl\brdrnil \trbrdrt\brdrnil \trbrdrr\brdrnil 
\clvertalt \clshdrawnil \clwWidth1260\clftsWidth3 \clmart10 \clmarl10 \clmarb10 \clmarr10 \clbrdrt\brdrnil \clbrdrl\brdrnil \clbrdrb\brdrnil \clbrdrr\brdrnil \clpadl0 \clpadr0 \gaph\cellx4320
\clvertalc \clshdrawnil \clbrdrt\brdrs\brdrw20\brdrcf4 \clbrdrl\brdrs\brdrw20\brdrcf4 \clbrdrb\brdrs\brdrw20\brdrcf4 \clbrdrr\brdrs\brdrw20\brdrcf4 \clpadl100 \clpadr100 \gaph\cellx8640
\pard\intbl\itap3\pardeftab720
\cf3 \nestcell 
\pard\intbl\itap3\pardeftab720
\cf3 \nestcell \lastrow\nestrow
\pard\intbl\itap2\pardeftab720\sl340\sa179

\f0\b\fs28 \cf5 \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
Transition Structures\
\pard\intbl\itap2\pardeftab720\sl439\sa221

\f1\b0\fs32 \cf0 \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
Transition structures 
\b \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
9
\b0 \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
\'96
\b \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
15
\b0 \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
 connect select minima; dashed lines indicate bonds being cleaved. The transition structures are described by two fundamentally different imaginary vibrational modes: (1) Li\'96O stretching during THF dissociation/association, and (2) N\'96Li stretching during lithium amide bond formation/cleavage. Both modes are characterized by low absolute values in imaginary frequencies ranging from 18 to 49 cm
\fs28 \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
\uc0\u8722 1
\fs32 \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
. The protocols required for locating transition structures are instructive. The standard method for locating transition structures was to perform a relaxed potential energy scan by incrementally stretching the bond of interest. For example, incrementally increasing the Li\'96O distance from 2.0 \'c5 by steps of 0.1 \'c5 raised the energy continuously until it dropped at 2.8 \'c5. Geometries were optimized at each point along the surface with the reaction coordinate describing the Li\'96O distance. The optimized geometry with r
\fs28 \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
Li\'96O
\fs32 \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
 = 2.8 \'c5 was a good initial guess for a transition state optimization.\
It became evident that only specific conformers could exit the trisolvated open dimer ensemble ({\field{\*\fldinst{HYPERLINK "http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC3184385/figure/F3/"}}{\fldrslt \cf3 \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
\ul \ulc3 Scheme 2}}). Whereas one conformer of 
\b \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
5
\b0 \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
 led to THF dissociation (
\b \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
11
\b0 \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
), another led to closed dimer-formation (
\b \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
12
\b0 \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
), and two others led to fragmentation (
\b \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
13
\b0 \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
 and 
\b \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
14
\b0 \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
). The importance of sampling conformational space cannot be overstated. Transition structure 
\b \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
11
\b0 \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
 proved particularly difficult to locate but offered interesting insights. Incrementally stretching the Li\'96O bond afforded no saddle points starting from any of the four lowest-energy trisolvated open dimer conformers akin to 
\b \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
5
\b0 \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
. Only by scanning from the highest-energy conformer could 
\b \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
11
\b0 \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
 finally be located. Incidentally, the highest-energy conformer connecting to 
\b \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
11
\b0 \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
 was not located by a rational sampling of all trisolvated open dimer conformers. A reverse IRC calculation from 
\b \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
13
\b0 \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
 led to this new geometry, which allowed us to locate 
\b \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
11
\b0 \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
; serendipity played a big role. The strategy of palpating forward and backward along the reaction coordinate using output geometries as the input for a new search proved an important strategy for locating transition structures.\
Transition structures corresponding to N\'96Li stretching (
\b \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
10
\b0 \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
, 
\b \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
12
\b0 \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
, and 
\b \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
13
\b0 \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
) were located using the scanning protocol. Again, the conformational geometry proved critical. Attempts to find transition structures describing the interconversion of conformers within the open dimer ensembles were unsuccessful, presumably owing to exceedingly low absolute values in the imaginary frequency. Casual inspection of the minima, however, suggests that their interconversion occurs via low energy barriers.\
\pard\intbl\itap2\pardeftab720\sl340\sa179

\f0\b\fs28 \cf5 \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
Tetrasolvated open dimers\
\pard\intbl\itap2\pardeftab720\sl439\sa221

\f1\b0\fs32 \cf0 \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
There is no experimental support for tetrasolvated-dimer-based deaggregations of LDA, but thanks in large part to prompts by a referee we examined the viability of tetrasolvated minima and transition structures as illustrated in {\field{\*\fldinst{HYPERLINK "http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC3184385/figure/F7/"}}{\fldrslt \cf3 \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
\ul \ulc3 Scheme 6}}. The energies dovetail with those in {\field{\*\fldinst{HYPERLINK "http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC3184385/figure/F3/"}}{\fldrslt \cf3 \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
\ul \ulc3 Scheme 2}}. Trisolvated open dimer 
\b \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
5
\b0 \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
 binds a THF at the external lithium (
\b \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
18
\b0 \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
) while trisolvate 
\b \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
16
\b0 \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
 binds THF at the internal lithium (
\b \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
19
\b0 \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
) both yielding tetrasolvated open dimer 
\b \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
20
\b0 \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
, albeit varying in conformational isomerism. Open dimer 
\b \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
20
\b0 \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
 then dissociates to two units of monomer 
\b \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
8
\b0 \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
 via transition structure 
\b \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
21
\b0 \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
 geometrically analogous to 
\b \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
13
\b0 \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
 and comparable in energy (22 kcal/mol).\
\pard\intbl\itap2\pardeftab720\sl439

\f0\fs28 \cf0 \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
\
\pard\intbl\itap2\pardeftab720\sl340

\b\fs32 \cf2 \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
Discussion\
\pard\intbl\itap2\pardeftab720\sl439\sa221

\f1\b0 \cf0 \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
The experimental background presented in the introduction paints a chaotic mechanistic picture of a delicate balance between rate-limiting aggregation events and rate-limiting reaction with substrates. DFT computational studies of LDA deaggregation afforded the series of minima that are illustrated in {\field{\*\fldinst{HYPERLINK "http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC3184385/figure/F2/"}}{\fldrslt \cf3 \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
\ul \ulc3 Scheme 1}}and delineated in full detail with the accompanying transition structures in {\field{\*\fldinst{HYPERLINK "http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC3184385/figure/F3/"}}{\fldrslt \cf3 \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
\ul \ulc3 Scheme 2}}. The overall picture shows a series of fleeting intermediates and transition structures computed to be within an energy range commensurate with the activation energies of LDA-mediated metalations. The results for the di- and trisolvates reflect results stemming from detailed rate studies. In addition, we examined the role of tetrasolvate-based deaggregations, which are not (yet) experimentally documented ({\field{\*\fldinst{HYPERLINK "http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC3184385/figure/F7/"}}{\fldrslt \cf3 \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
\ul \ulc3 Scheme 6}}).\
\pard\intbl\itap2\pardeftab720\sl340\sa179

\f0\b\fs28 \cf5 \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
LDA Deaggregation: An Overview\
\pard\intbl\itap2\pardeftab720\sl439\sa221

\f1\b0\fs32 \cf0 \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
The deaggregation of LDA dimer 
\b \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
1
\b0 \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
 is depicted moving from left to right along the reaction coordinate (
\i \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
x
\i0 \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
axis) of {\field{\*\fldinst{HYPERLINK "http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC3184385/figure/F3/"}}{\fldrslt \cf3 \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
\ul \ulc3 Scheme 2}}. Solvent exchanges interconverting closed dimers 
\b \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
1
\b0 \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
\'96
\b \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
3
\b0 \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
 are all facile, although asymmetric disolvate 
\b \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
3
\b0 \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
 is more than 12 kcal/mol less stable than dimer 
\b \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
1
\b0 \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
. The N\'96Li bond scission affords either disolvated open dimer 
\b \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
4
\b0 \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
 from asymmetric disolvated dimer 
\b \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
3
\b0 \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
 or trisolvated open dimer 
\b \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
5
\b0 \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
 from 
\b \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
2
\b0 \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
. Curiously, once open dimer 
\b \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
4
\b0 \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
 is formed, conversion to trisolvate 
\b \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
5
\b0 \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
 is a relatively unfavorable process. We elaborate on this finding in detail below.\
The highest barriers in the conversion of LDA dimer 
\b \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
1
\b0 \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
 to monomer 
\b \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
6
\b0 \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
 result from the second N\'96Li bond scission. The direct cleavage of 
\b \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
5
\b0 \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
 via transition structure 
\b \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
14
\b0 \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
 is quite unfavorable. We suspected that the requisite extrusion of a monosolvated monomer fragment to be highly destabilizing. Consequently, we considered alternative transition structures in which one of the two THF ligands on the terminal lithium of
\b \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
5
\b0 \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
 bridges the two lithiums (via 
\b \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
13
\b0 \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
) to afford 
\b \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
7
\b0 \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
. Computations show transition structure 
\b \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
13
\b0 \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
 to be preferred slightly over 
\b \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
14
\b0 \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
. Dimer 
\b \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
7
\b0 \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
 is held together by a single bridging THF ligand and has exclusively three-coordinate lithiums. The role of bridging THFs has been mentioned previously in the context of deaggregations,{\field{\*\fldinst{HYPERLINK "http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC3184385/#R25"}}{\fldrslt 
\fs28 \cf3 \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
\ul \ulc3 25}} and they are prevalent in the crystallographic literature.{\field{\*\fldinst{HYPERLINK "http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC3184385/#R26"}}{\fldrslt 
\fs28 \cf3 \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
\ul \ulc3 26}} We find the idea of such a neighboring-group-assisted scission as well as the symmetry of fleeting intermediate 
\b \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
13
\b0 \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
 to be appealing. Once extruded, disolvated LDA monomer 
\b \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
8
\b0 \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
 undergoes a facile solvation to give trisolvated monomer 
\b \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
6
\b0 \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
 as the most stable form.\
Activation energies above 20 kcal/mol as computed for transition structures 
\b \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
13
\b0 \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
, 
\b \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
14
\b0 \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
, and 
\b \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
21
\b0 \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
 are disconcerting. We traced these high energies to the incomplete basis set of 6\'9631G(d). As we move from left to right along the reaction coordinate in {\field{\*\fldinst{HYPERLINK "http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC3184385/figure/F3/"}}{\fldrslt \cf3 \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
\ul \ulc3 scheme 2}}, two originally intact N-Li bonds (
\b \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
1
\b0 \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
) are separated to a distance of around 3\'965 \'c5. Whereas a fraction of the N-Li bond enthalpy remains, the low Pople basis set (mandated by the size of the structures) no longer captures this electron density overlap. This is widely recognized as the basis set superposition error (BSSE) and leads to increased energies.{\field{\*\fldinst{HYPERLINK "http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC3184385/#R20"}}{\fldrslt 
\fs28 \cf3 \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
\ul \ulc3 20}} Correcting for BSSE with the counterpoise method reduces the energy of 
\b \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
13
\b0 \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
 by ~5 kcal/mol relative to 
\b \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
5
\b0 \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
. (More details on the counterpoise calculation are in {\field{\*\fldinst{HYPERLINK "http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC3184385/#SD1"}}{\fldrslt \cf3 \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
\ul \ulc3 supporting information}}.) The energy of 
\b \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
13
\b0 \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
 relative to 
\b \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
5
\b0 \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
 is reduced using an increased basis set [B3LYP/aug-pVDZ], reaffirming that the high energies of structures akin to 
\b \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
13
\b0 \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
 are a consequence of an incomplete basis set. The energy of 
\b \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
13
\b0 \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
 is estimated to be a more realistic 16 kcal/mol.\
The energies of transition structures with partially dissociated THF ligands (
\b \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
9
\b0 \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
, 
\b \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
11
\b0 \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
, 
\b \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
12
\b0 \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
, 
\b \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
15
\b0 \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
, and 
\b \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
21
\b0 \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
) also are elevated by about 2 kcal/mol resulting from BSSE. The effect of BSSE is especially pronounced as the O-Li distance is lengthened beyond 2.8 \'c5. Such is the case for 
\b \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
18
\b0 \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
 and 
\b \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
19
\b0 \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
, which required an additional diffuse basis function [6\'9631+G(d)] for convergence of the transition state optimization.\
\pard\intbl\itap2\pardeftab720\sl340\sa179

\f0\b\fs28 \cf5 \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
Conformers and Portals\
\pard\intbl\itap2\pardeftab720\sl439\sa221

\f1\b0\fs32 \cf0 \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
Both the cyclic dimers as well as the various transition structures are conformationally rigid, affording two trivially different conformers; the cyclic dimers and transition structures are clearly 
\i \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
not
\i0 \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
 conformationally promiscuous. By contrast, open dimers 
\b \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
4
\b0 \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
 and 
\b \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
5
\b0 \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
 display inordinate conformational diversity. Rotation about the terminal diisopropylamido moiety in 
\b \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
4
\b0 \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
 by 180\'b0 (see \uc0\u969 
\fs28 \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
CC
\fs32 \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
 in {\field{\*\fldinst{HYPERLINK "http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC3184385/figure/F4/"}}{\fldrslt \cf3 \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
\ul \ulc3 Scheme 3}}) afford eight conformers spanning a 2\'963 kcal/mol range; five of these conformers are illustrated in {\field{\*\fldinst{HYPERLINK "http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC3184385/figure/F5/"}}{\fldrslt \cf3 \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
\ul \ulc3 Scheme 4}} and discussed in the results section. The analogous survey of the more congested (highly geared) trisolvate 
\b \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
5
\b0 \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
 uncovered only five conformers spanning an 8 kcal/mol range ({\field{\*\fldinst{HYPERLINK "http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC3184385/figure/F6/"}}{\fldrslt \cf3 \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
\ul \ulc3 Scheme 5}}). An intriguing consequence of the conformationally variable open dimers and conformationally rigid transition structures is a notion we refer to as portals. In the most general sense, we find that the transition structures are flanked by a 
\i \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
single
\i0 \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
conformer\'97a so-called portal\'97within the ensemble of conformers.\
The specific example illustrated in {\field{\*\fldinst{HYPERLINK "http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC3184385/figure/F8/"}}{\fldrslt \cf3 \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
\ul \ulc3 Scheme 7}} is instructive. The sequence begins with open dimer 
\b \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
4
\b0 \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
 in its most stable conformer (
\b \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
4a
\b0 \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
). IRC calculations confirm the conversion of conformer 
\b \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
4a
\b0 \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
 via transition structure 
\b \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
11
\b0 \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
 to give trisolvated open dimer as conformer 
\b \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
5a
\b0 \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
. A particularly interesting point is noted by returning to {\field{\*\fldinst{HYPERLINK "http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC3184385/figure/F3/"}}{\fldrslt \cf3 \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
\ul \ulc3 Scheme 2}}. Conformer 
\b \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
4a
\b0 \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
 is the 
\i \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
lowest
\i0 \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
 energy conformer of 
\b \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
4
\b0 \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
, whereas trisolvate 
\b \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
5a
\b0 \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
 is the
\i \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
highest
\i0 \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
 energy conformer of 
\b \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
5
\b0 \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
\'97
\i \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
8 kcal/mol above the most stable conformer
\i0 \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
. Even casual inspection of 
\b \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
5a
\b0 \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
reveals an odd looking orthogonal orientation of the THF ligand on the internal lithium when compared with the four other trisolvates illustrated in {\field{\*\fldinst{HYPERLINK "http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC3184385/figure/F6/"}}{\fldrslt \cf3 \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
\ul \ulc3 Scheme 5}}. To complete the deaggregation, 
\b \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
5a
\b0 \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
 is converted to dimer 
\b \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
7
\b0 \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
 via transition structure 
\b \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
13
\b0 \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
 involving N\'96Li bond scission with assistance by a bridging THF ligand. Dimer 
\b \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
7
\b0 \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
 is held together by a single bridging THF ligand, rendering it labile to solvent-assisted fragmentation to give monomer.\cf3 \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
\

\itap3\trowd \taflags0 \trgaph108\trleft-108 \trbrdrt\brdrnil \trbrdrl\brdrnil \trbrdrt\brdrnil \trbrdrr\brdrnil 
\clvertalt \clshdrawnil \clwWidth1260\clftsWidth3 \clmart10 \clmarl10 \clmarb10 \clmarr10 \clbrdrt\brdrnil \clbrdrl\brdrnil \clbrdrb\brdrnil \clbrdrr\brdrnil \clpadl0 \clpadr0 \gaph\cellx2160
\clvertalc \clshdrawnil \clbrdrt\brdrs\brdrw20\brdrcf4 \clbrdrl\brdrs\brdrw20\brdrcf4 \clbrdrb\brdrs\brdrw20\brdrcf4 \clbrdrr\brdrs\brdrw20\brdrcf4 \clpadl100 \clpadr100 \gaph\cellx4320
\clvertalc \clshdrawnil \clbrdrt\brdrs\brdrw20\brdrcf4 \clbrdrl\brdrs\brdrw20\brdrcf4 \clbrdrb\brdrs\brdrw20\brdrcf4 \clbrdrr\brdrs\brdrw20\brdrcf4 \clpadl100 \clpadr100 \gaph\cellx6480
\clvertalc \clshdrawnil \clbrdrt\brdrs\brdrw20\brdrcf4 \clbrdrl\brdrs\brdrw20\brdrcf4 \clbrdrb\brdrs\brdrw20\brdrcf4 \clbrdrr\brdrs\brdrw20\brdrcf4 \clpadl100 \clpadr100 \gaph\cellx8640
\pard\intbl\itap3\pardeftab720
\cf3 \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
\nestcell 
\pard\intbl\itap3\pardeftab720
\cf3 \nestcell 
\pard\intbl\itap3\pardeftab720
\cf3 \nestcell 
\pard\intbl\itap3\pardeftab720
\cf3 \nestcell \lastrow\nestrow
\pard\intbl\itap2\pardeftab720\sl439\sa221
\cf0 \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
The conformational effects are more than idle curiosities; they could be the source of the complex and multifaceted dynamics of LDA. IRC calculations show that the transition structures represent specific transitions between two 
\i \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
unique
\i0 \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
 conformers of two structural forms. The conversion of the lowest energy conformer of open dimer 
\b \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
4a
\b0 \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
 via transition structure 
\b \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
11
\b0 \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
 is representative of the general principle of conformational sampling. Transition structure 
\b \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
11
\b0 \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
 was the only transition structure for the conversion of 
\b \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
4
\b0 \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
to 
\b \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
5
\b0 \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
 that we could find, suggesting that the most expedient conversion of 
\b \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
4
\b0 \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
 to 
\b \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
5
\b0 \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
 is to return to starting dimer
\b \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
1
\b0 \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
 ({\field{\*\fldinst{HYPERLINK "http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC3184385/figure/F9/"}}{\fldrslt \cf3 \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
\ul \ulc3 Scheme 8}}) and open directly via transition structure 
\b \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
12
\b0 \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
.\cf3 \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
\

\itap3\trowd \taflags0 \trgaph108\trleft-108 \trbrdrt\brdrnil \trbrdrl\brdrnil \trbrdrt\brdrnil \trbrdrr\brdrnil 
\clvertalt \clshdrawnil \clwWidth1260\clftsWidth3 \clmart10 \clmarl10 \clmarb10 \clmarr10 \clbrdrt\brdrnil \clbrdrl\brdrnil \clbrdrb\brdrnil \clbrdrr\brdrnil \clpadl0 \clpadr0 \gaph\cellx1728
\clvertalc \clshdrawnil \clbrdrt\brdrs\brdrw20\brdrcf4 \clbrdrl\brdrs\brdrw20\brdrcf4 \clbrdrb\brdrs\brdrw20\brdrcf4 \clbrdrr\brdrs\brdrw20\brdrcf4 \clpadl100 \clpadr100 \gaph\cellx3456
\clvertalc \clshdrawnil \clbrdrt\brdrs\brdrw20\brdrcf4 \clbrdrl\brdrs\brdrw20\brdrcf4 \clbrdrb\brdrs\brdrw20\brdrcf4 \clbrdrr\brdrs\brdrw20\brdrcf4 \clpadl100 \clpadr100 \gaph\cellx5184
\clvertalc \clshdrawnil \clbrdrt\brdrs\brdrw20\brdrcf4 \clbrdrl\brdrs\brdrw20\brdrcf4 \clbrdrb\brdrs\brdrw20\brdrcf4 \clbrdrr\brdrs\brdrw20\brdrcf4 \clpadl100 \clpadr100 \gaph\cellx6912
\clvertalc \clshdrawnil \clbrdrt\brdrs\brdrw20\brdrcf4 \clbrdrl\brdrs\brdrw20\brdrcf4 \clbrdrb\brdrs\brdrw20\brdrcf4 \clbrdrr\brdrs\brdrw20\brdrcf4 \clpadl100 \clpadr100 \gaph\cellx8640
\pard\intbl\itap3\pardeftab720
\cf3 \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
\nestcell 
\pard\intbl\itap3\pardeftab720
\cf3 \nestcell 
\pard\intbl\itap3\pardeftab720
\cf3 \nestcell 
\pard\intbl\itap3\pardeftab720
\cf3 \nestcell 
\pard\intbl\itap3\pardeftab720
\cf3 \nestcell \lastrow\nestrow
\pard\intbl\itap2\pardeftab720\sl340\sa179

\f0\b\fs28 \cf5 \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
Rate-Limiting Deaggregations and Substrate Dependencies\
\pard\intbl\itap2\pardeftab720\sl439\sa221

\f1\b0\fs32 \cf0 \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
The unequal receptivity of conformers of 
\b \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
4
\b0 \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
 to incoming ligands could be an important determinant of reactivity; precoordinating substrates, for example, would manifest a preference for particular conformers. Under conditions in which the subsequent reaction is fast on the time scale of substrate complexation (vide infra), coordination of substrate would be rate limiting and could be product determining.\
Mechanistic studies of LDA-mediated reactions in THF at \uc0\u8722 78 \'b0C have focused on the role of rate-limiting deaggregation as well as ways in which salts catalyze and autocatalyze the deaggregation to form monomers. Throughout these studies, however, we have noted some odd behaviors including (1) rate-limiting deaggregations that proceed through transition structures of distinctly different stoichiometries (di- versus trisolvated dimers),{\field{\*\fldinst{HYPERLINK "http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC3184385/#R8"}}{\fldrslt 
\fs28 \cf3 \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
\ul \ulc3 8}}
\fs28 \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
,{\field{\*\fldinst{HYPERLINK "http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC3184385/#R9"}}{\fldrslt \cf3 \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
\ul \ulc3 9}},{\field{\*\fldinst{HYPERLINK "http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC3184385/#R27"}}{\fldrslt \cf3 \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
\ul \ulc3 27a}}
\fs32 \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
 (2) substrate-concentration-dependent rate-limiting deaggregations,{\field{\*\fldinst{HYPERLINK "http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC3184385/#R27"}}{\fldrslt 
\fs28 \cf3 \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
\ul \ulc3 27a,d}}(3) reactions following post-rate-limiting steps that involve dimers and others that involve monomers,{\field{\*\fldinst{HYPERLINK "http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC3184385/#R27"}}{\fldrslt 
\fs28 \cf3 \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
\ul \ulc3 27a}}(4) reactions that are faster than those limited by aggregation and display substrate dependencies,{\field{\*\fldinst{HYPERLINK "http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC3184385/#R27"}}{\fldrslt 
\fs28 \cf3 \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
\ul \ulc3 27e}} and (5) reactions in which proton transfers are 
\i \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
mechanistically
\i0 \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
 different than the corresponding deuterium transfers.{\field{\*\fldinst{HYPERLINK "http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC3184385/#R29"}}{\fldrslt 
\fs28 \cf3 \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
\ul \ulc3 29a,b}} The computations serve as a pedagogically useful template with which to understand these seemingly disparate experimental observations.\
Let us simplify the discussion by focusing on three structurally distinct forms of LDA ({\field{\*\fldinst{HYPERLINK "http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC3184385/figure/F10/"}}{\fldrslt \cf3 \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
\ul \ulc3 Scheme 9}}) and consider several discrete categories of reactivity:\
\pard\intbl\itap2\tx220\tx720\pardeftab720\li720\fi-720\sl439
\ls1\ilvl0\cf0 \kerning1\expnd0\expndtw0 {\listtext	1.	}\expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
For the preponderance of LDA-mediated reactions studied to date,{\field{\*\fldinst{HYPERLINK "http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC3184385/#R3"}}{\fldrslt 
\fs28 \cf3 \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
\ul \ulc3 3}} the barriers to reactions with an electrophile, E
\fs28 \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
+
\fs32 \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
, are measurably higher than the barriers to solvent and aggregate exchanges, which ensures that 
\b \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
1
\b0 \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
, 
\b \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
4
\b0 \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
, and 
\b \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
6
\b0 \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
 are at full equilibrium on the time scales of the reaction. Although one cannot say a priori which of the three will be the key intermediate from which the reaction occurs, the historical record suggests that reaction out of monomers is most likely.{\field{\*\fldinst{HYPERLINK "http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC3184385/#R3"}}{\fldrslt 
\fs28 \cf3 \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
\ul \ulc3 3}} Importantly, the 
\i \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
rates
\i0 \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
 that aggregation and solvation events occur do 
\i \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
not
\i0 \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
 dictate reaction rates.\uc0\u8232 \
\ls1\ilvl0\kerning1\expnd0\expndtw0 {\listtext	2.	}\expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
Imagine that the reactivity of E
\fs28 \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
+
\fs32 \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
 is systematically increased with a commensurate decrease in reaction temperature to allow us to monitor the rates conveniently. At some level of reactivity\'97at some affiliated reaction temperature\'97the barrier to the formation of 
\b \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
6
\b0 \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
 is predicted to become higher than the barrier to reaction of E
\fs28 \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
+
\fs32 \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
 with 
\b \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
1
\b0 \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
 or 
\b \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
4
\b0 \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
. Through a bizarre twist of fate, that temperature is found experimentally to be approximately \uc0\u8722 78 \'b0C, the most prevalent temperature reported by synthetic chemists. The reaction rate has become aggregation limited. Provided that monomer is the preferred pathway, then the rate-limiting transition structure is one of the trisolvated dimers 
\b \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
11
\b0 \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
\'96
\b \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
14
\b0 \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
, which coincides nicely with rate studies of the 1,4-additions to unsaturated esters.{\field{\*\fldinst{HYPERLINK "http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC3184385/#R9"}}{\fldrslt 
\fs28 \cf3 \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
\ul \ulc3 9}} LiCl-catalyzed deaggregation (facile dimer-monomer equilibration) reduces the barrier to exchange, causing the reaction to become dependent once again on the structure and concentration of E
\fs28 \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
+
\fs32 \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
. This theme recurs for ortholithiations and 1,4-additions.\uc0\u8232 \
\ls1\ilvl0\kerning1\expnd0\expndtw0 {\listtext	3.	}\expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
With increasing reactivity of E
\fs28 \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
+
\fs32 \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
, reaction via 
\b \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
4
\b0 \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
 becomes more viable. (In fact, reactions via all intermediates would be predicted to become more viable.) Even if monomers are extraordinarily reactive, reaction via dimer 
\b \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
4
\b0 \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
 will be observed if the barrier to deaggregation is too high. Fleeting dimer 
\b \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
4
\b0 \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
 could be formed reversibly, and the reaction would 
\i \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
still
\i0 \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
 be aggregation limited to the extent that access to monomer has been precluded. In such a scenario, the reaction with E
\fs28 \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
+
\fs32 \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
 would be rate limiting and manifest a seemingly normal first-order substrate dependence. This scenario was noted during ortholithiations ({\field{\*\fldinst{HYPERLINK "http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC3184385/#FD3"}}{\fldrslt \cf3 \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
\ul \ulc3 eq 3}}).\uc0\u8232 \
\ls1\ilvl0\kerning1\expnd0\expndtw0 {\listtext	4.	}\expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
Increasing the reactivity of the substrate in part 3 could cause 
\b \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
4
\b0 \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
 to be trapped efficiently on the time scales that 
\b \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
4
\b0 \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
 returns to cyclic dimer 
\b \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
1
\b0 \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
. If so, the formation of dimer 
\b \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
4
\b0 \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
 becomes rate limiting. The reaction will display a zeroth-order in substrate, zeroth order in THF, and first order in LDA, all consistent with disolvated dimer 
\b \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
10
\b0 \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
 being the rate-limiting transition structure. The reaction would also, at least in principle, show no isotope effect. (We say more about isotope effects below.) Comparison of the two limiting scenarios in parts 3 and 4 shows that open dimer 
\b \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
4
\b0 \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
 can be cleanly rate limiting, partially rate limiting, or not rate limiting, all depending on the choice of substrate.{\field{\*\fldinst{HYPERLINK "http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC3184385/#R28"}}{\fldrslt 
\fs28 \cf3 \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
\ul \ulc3 28}}\uc0\u8232 \
\ls1\ilvl0\kerning1\expnd0\expndtw0 {\listtext	5.	}\expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
The most reactive substrates would find that the barrier to reaction with one of the closed dimers (
\b \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
1
\b0 \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
\'96
\b \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
3
\b0 \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
) is lower than the barrier to partial scission to form 
\b \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
4
\b0 \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
 or 
\b \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
5
\b0 \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
 and even lower than the free energies of 
\b \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
4
\b0 \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
 and 
\b \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
5
\b0 \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
. Given the putative facile solvent exchange, these reactions would be faster than those that are aggregation limited. They would also exhibit first-order dependencies on E
\fs28 \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
+
\fs32 \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
and LDA concentrations as well as standard kinetic isotope effects. We have not documented uncontestable examples of facile reactions via closed dimers because the half-lives are quite short at \uc0\u8722 78 \'b0C.{\field{\*\fldinst{HYPERLINK "http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC3184385/#R29"}}{\fldrslt 
\fs28 \cf3 \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
\ul \ulc3 29}} We have, however, obtained some hints of this behavior from ortholithiations, imine lithiations, and enolizations.\cf3 \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
\

\itap3\trowd \taflags0 \trgaph108\trleft-108 \trbrdrt\brdrnil \trbrdrl\brdrnil \trbrdrt\brdrnil \trbrdrr\brdrnil 
\clvertalt \clshdrawnil \clwWidth1260\clftsWidth3 \clmart10 \clmarl10 \clmarb10 \clmarr10 \clbrdrt\brdrnil \clbrdrl\brdrnil \clbrdrb\brdrnil \clbrdrr\brdrnil \clpadl0 \clpadr0 \gaph\cellx1440
\clvertalc \clshdrawnil \clbrdrt\brdrs\brdrw20\brdrcf4 \clbrdrl\brdrs\brdrw20\brdrcf4 \clbrdrb\brdrs\brdrw20\brdrcf4 \clbrdrr\brdrs\brdrw20\brdrcf4 \clpadl100 \clpadr100 \gaph\cellx2880
\clvertalc \clshdrawnil \clbrdrt\brdrs\brdrw20\brdrcf4 \clbrdrl\brdrs\brdrw20\brdrcf4 \clbrdrb\brdrs\brdrw20\brdrcf4 \clbrdrr\brdrs\brdrw20\brdrcf4 \clpadl100 \clpadr100 \gaph\cellx4320
\clvertalc \clshdrawnil \clbrdrt\brdrs\brdrw20\brdrcf4 \clbrdrl\brdrs\brdrw20\brdrcf4 \clbrdrb\brdrs\brdrw20\brdrcf4 \clbrdrr\brdrs\brdrw20\brdrcf4 \clpadl100 \clpadr100 \gaph\cellx5760
\clvertalc \clshdrawnil \clbrdrt\brdrs\brdrw20\brdrcf4 \clbrdrl\brdrs\brdrw20\brdrcf4 \clbrdrb\brdrs\brdrw20\brdrcf4 \clbrdrr\brdrs\brdrw20\brdrcf4 \clpadl100 \clpadr100 \gaph\cellx7200
\clvertalc \clshdrawnil \clbrdrt\brdrs\brdrw20\brdrcf4 \clbrdrl\brdrs\brdrw20\brdrcf4 \clbrdrb\brdrs\brdrw20\brdrcf4 \clbrdrr\brdrs\brdrw20\brdrcf4 \clpadl100 \clpadr100 \gaph\cellx8640
\pard\intbl\itap3\pardeftab720
\cf3 \nestcell 
\pard\intbl\itap3\pardeftab720
\cf3 \nestcell 
\pard\intbl\itap3\pardeftab720
\cf3 \nestcell 
\pard\intbl\itap3\pardeftab720
\cf3 \nestcell 
\pard\intbl\itap3\pardeftab720
\cf3 \nestcell 
\pard\intbl\itap3\pardeftab720
\cf3 \nestcell \lastrow\nestrow
\pard\intbl\itap2\pardeftab720\sl439\sa221
\cf0 \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
In a survey of the influence of catalytic quantities of LiCl on the rate of ortholithiation, we may have inadvertently scanned through the behaviors covered by parts 1\'965. We offer a highly stylized graphic in {\field{\*\fldinst{HYPERLINK "http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC3184385/figure/F1/"}}{\fldrslt \cf3 \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
\ul \ulc3 Figure 1}} to aid the description. We found that the least reactive substrates and the most reactive substrates were 
\i \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
not
\i0 \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
 catalyzed by LiCl, whereas substrates of intermediate reactivity displayed the properties of aggregate-limiting behavior consistent with the descriptions in parts 2\'964.{\field{\*\fldinst{HYPERLINK "http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC3184385/#R7"}}{\fldrslt 
\fs28 \cf3 \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
\ul \ulc3 7}} These findings baffled us at the time but make sense in retrospect. Of course, the least reactive substrates lithiate under conditions of full aggregate equilibration (part 1), which eliminates the need for LiCl catalysis in the deaggregation. The most reactive substrates do not benefit from deaggregation because the free energy of formation of monomer is higher than the dimer-based transition structure (part 5). It is only those of intermediate reactivity for which catalysis of monomer formation can reduce the barrier of a beneficial (possibly mandatory) deaggregation (parts 2\'964).\cf3 \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
\

\itap3\trowd \taflags0 \trgaph108\trleft-108 \trbrdrt\brdrnil \trbrdrl\brdrnil \trbrdrt\brdrnil \trbrdrr\brdrnil 
\clvertalt \clshdrawnil \clwWidth9020\clftsWidth3 \clmart10 \clmarl10 \clmarb10 \clmarr10 \clbrdrt\brdrnil \clbrdrl\brdrnil \clbrdrb\brdrnil \clbrdrr\brdrnil \clpadl0 \clpadr0 \gaph\cellx1234
\clvertalc \clshdrawnil \clbrdrt\brdrs\brdrw20\brdrcf4 \clbrdrl\brdrs\brdrw20\brdrcf4 \clbrdrb\brdrs\brdrw20\brdrcf4 \clbrdrr\brdrs\brdrw20\brdrcf4 \clpadl100 \clpadr100 \gaph\cellx2468
\clvertalc \clshdrawnil \clbrdrt\brdrs\brdrw20\brdrcf4 \clbrdrl\brdrs\brdrw20\brdrcf4 \clbrdrb\brdrs\brdrw20\brdrcf4 \clbrdrr\brdrs\brdrw20\brdrcf4 \clpadl100 \clpadr100 \gaph\cellx3702
\clvertalc \clshdrawnil \clbrdrt\brdrs\brdrw20\brdrcf4 \clbrdrl\brdrs\brdrw20\brdrcf4 \clbrdrb\brdrs\brdrw20\brdrcf4 \clbrdrr\brdrs\brdrw20\brdrcf4 \clpadl100 \clpadr100 \gaph\cellx4937
\clvertalc \clshdrawnil \clbrdrt\brdrs\brdrw20\brdrcf4 \clbrdrl\brdrs\brdrw20\brdrcf4 \clbrdrb\brdrs\brdrw20\brdrcf4 \clbrdrr\brdrs\brdrw20\brdrcf4 \clpadl100 \clpadr100 \gaph\cellx6171
\clvertalc \clshdrawnil \clbrdrt\brdrs\brdrw20\brdrcf4 \clbrdrl\brdrs\brdrw20\brdrcf4 \clbrdrb\brdrs\brdrw20\brdrcf4 \clbrdrr\brdrs\brdrw20\brdrcf4 \clpadl100 \clpadr100 \gaph\cellx7405
\clvertalc \clshdrawnil \clbrdrt\brdrs\brdrw20\brdrcf4 \clbrdrl\brdrs\brdrw20\brdrcf4 \clbrdrb\brdrs\brdrw20\brdrcf4 \clbrdrr\brdrs\brdrw20\brdrcf4 \clpadl100 \clpadr100 \gaph\cellx8640
\pard\intbl\itap3\pardeftab720
\cf3 \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
\nestcell 
\pard\intbl\itap3\pardeftab720
\cf3 \nestcell 
\pard\intbl\itap3\pardeftab720
\cf3 \nestcell 
\pard\intbl\itap3\pardeftab720
\cf3 \nestcell 
\pard\intbl\itap3\pardeftab720
\cf3 \nestcell 
\pard\intbl\itap3\pardeftab720
\cf3 \nestcell 
\pard\intbl\itap3\pardeftab720
\cf3 \nestcell \lastrow\nestrow
\pard\intbl\itap2\pardeftab720\sl439\sa221
\cf0 \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
We close with some comments about kinetic isotope effects. Of course, a reaction in which proton transfer is rate limiting would manifest a primary kinetic isotope effect. In theory, a zeroth-order substrate dependence arising from a rate-limiting deaggregation also would afford an isotope effect of unity. In practice, we have found that large kinetic isotope effects\'97
\i \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
k
\i0\fs28 \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
H
\fs32 \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
/
\i \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
k
\i0\fs28 \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
D
\fs32 \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
 above 30 is commonplace for ortholithiations\'97can cause the rate-limiting step to shift from deaggregation to deuterium transfer. This shift in rate limitation is, although complicating at times, quite logical.{\field{\*\fldinst{HYPERLINK "http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC3184385/#R27"}}{\fldrslt 
\fs28 \cf3 \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
\ul \ulc3 27b}}
\f0\fs28 \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
\
\pard\intbl\itap2\pardeftab720\sl340

\b\fs32 \cf2 \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
Conclusion\
\pard\intbl\itap2\pardeftab720\sl439\sa221

\f1\b0 \cf0 \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
We are struggling to understand a mechanistically complex subset of LDA chemistry in which aggregation events dictate reactivity. DFT computations describing the deaggregation of LDA dimer 
\b \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
1
\b0 \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
 to monomer 
\b \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
6
\b0 \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
offer a number of potentially interesting qualitative and semi-quantitative insights. The computed barriers for partial and total scission are comparable to the barriers gleaned from a growing body of experimentally derived examples of aggregation-limited reactions of LDA in THF at \uc0\u8722 78 \'b0C. Although conformational isomerism of key intermediates (especially the most conformationally flexible open dimers) was expected, the number of minima and the range of their computed energies were certainly not. The most interesting aspect is that conformationally rigid transition structures serve as portals connecting specific conformers of open dimer intermediates. The conformational restrictions contribute to experimentally important activation barriers. The summaries in {\field{\*\fldinst{HYPERLINK "http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC3184385/figure/F2/"}}{\fldrslt \cf3 \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
\ul \ulc3 Schemes 1}} and {\field{\*\fldinst{HYPERLINK "http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC3184385/figure/F3/"}}{\fldrslt \cf3 \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
\ul \ulc3 2}} offer excellent structural supports for discussions of seemingly disparate, sometimes paradoxical experimental observations.\
The complexity is exacerbated by lithium salt-catalyzed dimer-monomer exhange.{\field{\*\fldinst{HYPERLINK "http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC3184385/#R7"}}{\fldrslt 
\fs28 \cf3 \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
\ul \ulc3 7}} We have had some success examining the mechanism of catalysis, but the details of the underlying LDA\'96LiX interactions are still elusive. We also have unpublished data suggesting conversions of cyclic dimers to open dimers are catalyzed, and that LDA-derived 
\i \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
tetramers
\i0 \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
 are central to some reactions.{\field{\*\fldinst{HYPERLINK "http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC3184385/#R27"}}{\fldrslt 
\fs28 \cf3 \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
\ul \ulc3 27}} Tetramer intermediates significantly change the plotline and add to the growing demand for a detailed experimental investigation of the solution dynamics of LDA in THF.\
Of course, the experimental and computational conclusions apply only to reactions in THF solution. What happens when reactions are carried out in inferior ligands such as diethyl ether or 
\i \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
tert
\i0 \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
-butyl methyl ether? Are rate-limiting deaggregations and salt-catalyzed deaggregations more or less prominent? We may have only scratched the surface.\nestcell \lastrow\nestrow\cell \lastrow\row
}